JUDY WOODRUFF: And to the
analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
So, let's continue the
conversation about James Comey.
David, we heard today what
the president thinks of it.
He said he thought the former
FBI director vindicated him,
but he also was telling lies.
What did you think?
DAVID BROOKS: I thought Trump
actually had some points.
I think one of the things we
heard on the criminal side, it
wasn't a bad, not a terrible
day for Donald Trump.
James Comey seemed to suggest
that there was no -- maybe --
cast some doubt at least the
idea there was a lot
of collusion between
the Russian government
and the Trump campaign
or even a lot of conversations.
I think what Trump did to James
Comey, clearing the room and
asking him to lay off on Flynn,
was scandalous, I think
terrible, but probably
not something that
would rise to the level
of impeachment in any
normal presidency.
So, to me, on the criminal
front, not a disastrous
testimony for Donald Trump.
On the cultural front, on the
moral front, kind of disastrous.
The thought that he
lied is pretty strong.
We do know, because of
what Comey said yesterday,
there's going to be a
lot more investigations.
And every time there's
some sort of independent
or special investigation
into the White House,
it can swallow a White
House up not only for
months, but for years.
The Whitewater investigation
went on for seven years.
And so I think what's going
to happen is, you are going to
have a continued administration
that's dysfunctional, that
is under investigation,
that is distrustful,
and a president who's
obsessed, not with policy, not
with anything constructive,
but with this sort of warfare.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What did
you make of James Comey
and what he had to say?
MARK SHIELDS: I thought
James Comey was believable.
I thought he was compelling,
in large part because,
Judy, he admitted his flaws.
He did not present
himself as Galahad or
some profile in courage.
He acknowledged the fact that
the pressure of being one-on-one
with the president just
in the White House, that he
had not said to the president
it was inappropriate.
He said he hadn't
been strong enough.
But what was most revealing
to me of all the hearings,
Republicans -- and I do want the
say one word to the senators.
I mean, they didn't
do soliloquies.
They didn't do seven-minute
statements followed by a
question, do you agree?
I thought -- and they didn't
show rank partisanship,
I felt, and that there
was a seriousness led
by Chairman Burr
and Co-Chair Warner.
But what impressed me most of
all was that, while Republican
senators were willing to
come to the defense of the
president, a point David made,
that there wasn't obstruction
of justice on his part
or whatever, none of
them challenged Director
Comey's direct statements
the president lied and that
he was a liar, and that that
is why he had to memorialize
each meeting with the
president, each conversation
with the president,
because he feared that
the president would lie.
And nobody said, no,
wait a minute, this
is George Washington.
This is a man, a total --
he does have a reputation
for exaggeration, hyping,
and some would say
not a totally consistent
relationship with the
truth and reality.
And I think that's a
real problem for him.
The fact he wasn't under
investigation is significant,
but, ironically, nobody asked
him, and Director Comey didn't
volunteer, whether, as a
consequence of what happened
in his meetings at the
White House, that he may
now have opened himself
up to some investigation,
he, the president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
And, as we reported earlier,
David, the president said today
he sure -- he would be glad to
or would be willing to speak
under oath to the special
counsel, Robert Mueller, about
what happened.
But given what you and Mark are
saying, does Comey now come out
with his credibility intact?
DAVID BROOKS: I think so.
I think he's a careful witness.
He was a very believable
witness, as Mark said.
And I think what we saw
in the Comey testimony was
really a clash of cultures.
James Comey is an
institutional man.
He serves the FBI.
He believes in a
government of laws.
He believes in following the
procedures and norms that
really govern any organization.
We are a nation of laws.
Donald Trump lives in
an entirely different
cultural universe.
He is more clannist,
believing in clan, believing
in family, believing in
loyalty, not recognizing
objective law, not recognizing
the procedures that is really
how modern government operates.
So when Paul Ryan and other
Republicans say, well, Donald
Trump just didn't know the rules
because he's an innocent
at this, he's a newbie at
this, that's insufficient.
It's not only that he doesn't
know the rules, but at all along
and throughout his presidency,
he has sort of trampled
on the rules almost as
a matter of policy, as
a matter of character,
because he doesn't believe in
that kind of relationships.
It's all personal
loyalty, not about laws
and norms and standards.
And I do think, eventually,
down the road, that is going
to be a continual source of
problem for him, that he's
continually violating the
way we do our government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And,
Mark, what about the
-- David brought it up.
Speaker Paul Ryan said --
essentially gives the president
a pass, saying, well, he's new
to Washington, doesn't know
how government works, he's
not a man of government.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, he's an
enormous child, and we just --
we don't have the same rules
for him.
It was less than fatuous.
It was dishonest and misleading
on the part of the speaker.
And you cannot say that.
This man has been
running for president.
He is president.
If you have any -- he is a
graduate of Wharton, although I
would like to see the director
of admissions at some point
come forward and explain his
knowledge of American government
from his experience at the
University of Pennsylvania.
But you can't use these
kind of excuses, Judy.
Just picking up on what David
was saying, what is fascinating
about the Comey testimony,
if you listened to it -- I
listened to every word of it --
is that Donald Trump -- David
mentions loyalty.
Loyalty to Donald
Trump is one way.
Every one of the co-authors
who has worked with him on
any of his books has agreed on
one thing.
He is a man without any friends.
He could not name a friend.
The one person that he's shown
any sense of loyalty to --
he shows none to the people
around him -- is
General Mike Flynn.
And it's curious.
What is it about
that relationship?
What was it that Mike Flynn
did or was doing or that Donald
Trump is concerned that he
might say?
And he said, in the course
of the conversation,
other satellites,
referring to people who
worked with him on his campaign
other satellites, if they
were involved, go after them.
You know, that's OK.
But could you go easy on Mike?
And the idea of clearing out the
room, clearing out the -- the
attorney general of the United
States walking out.
I mean, Jeff Sessions had
a terrible day yesterday,
and so did Reince Priebus,
the chief of staff
of the White House, when it
was revealed that they left the
president alone, left the FBI
director one-on-one with the
president and, for, obviously,
purpose that the president
wanted special favors.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, he was
saying go easy on - - lay off
of Mike Flynn and tell the world
that I'm in the clear.
MARK SHIELDS: I'm in the clear.
That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, David, so
it comes down to he said vs.
he said, and you were saying
a minute ago, this
could drag on for years.
How much damage has been done?
You're talking -- I hear you
referring to the culture.
How much damage is being
done to this president?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I
think modest damage
around the country.
As we just heard, around the
country, it wasn't as big a
story as it was in Washington.
I was at O'Hare Airport
trying to watch it on TV.
I couldn't find any TVs
that had the hearings on.
They were all on
sports channels.
So, I'm not sure,
politically, immediately.
But I do think the scandal here,
the fact Trump will probably be
investigated for obstruction,
and maybe Sessions will be
investigated, and once these
investigations started, they go
on forever.
The Whitewater started
as a land deal.
And then, when it started,
Monica Lewinsky was an
unknown person in college.
And then it turned into the
Monica Lewinsky scandal.
They go on for years
and they spread out.
And what happens within the
administration is, nobody
knows who's being investigated.
Nobody knows who is
saying what under oath.
And if Donald Trump is really
willing 100 percent to testify
under oath, he's very naive
about what that process means,
about what happens when you
start shifting your stories,
what happens when you
start talking the way
Donald Trump normally
talks, which is imprecise,
at best.
And that sort of thing
is bound to get an
administration in trouble.
And I think that will become
the rising tide that will not
destroy this administration,
but it's going to be a long,
slow entanglement in the culture
of crisis and the culture of
scandal.
MARK SHIELDS: Let me give
you an immediate problem
that they have, Judy.
There's a gubernatorial
race in Virginia.
Virginia, New Jersey
have off-year elections.
And Tuesday is the
primary in Virginia.
And the lieutenant governor, a
rather mild-mannered pediatric
doctor, surgeon, is running on a
slogan and a TV ad that
says, do not let this
narcissistic maniac,
Donald Trump, which tells
you two things.
One, sort of where -- we
have debased the dialogue
and debate in America.
Why is he doing it, though?
He's running it because
he's challenged by a
former congressman,
Tom Perriello, who is
backed by an awful lot of
Obama people, in Bernie
Sanders, Elizabeth Warren.
And why is he running this way?
Because, in Virginia,
among Democratic voters,
according to the Quinnipiac
poll, Donald Trump
is 95 percent unfavorable
and 3 percent favorable.
So that's what Republicans
are facing right now.
They cannot embrace him,
because he's going to be Typhoid
Mary in November of 2018.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, David,
as you and Mark just heard in
Hari's interview with those
reporters from Nevada and
Indiana and West Virginia,
they're saying, you know, a lot
of people are going about
their lives and a lot of people
who voted for Donald Trump
are just not paying
much attention.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I think
that's generally true.
There has been slippage
among Republicans since
he was inaugurated.
Republican support
is down 7 percent.
Among those who are really
strongly supporting him,
it's down a little more.
And so there's
been some slippage.
It's a slow erosion.
I think, right now, he can only
-- he is at 39, or whatever it
is, percent approval rating.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
That is bad, but
it's not cataclysmic,
especially among his base.
So the problem is right
now not a mass public
erosion of support.
Right now, the problem is
in Washington, where he
actually has to govern.
The senators, as Mark
said, did a very good job.
But there is a huge wall
of difference between a
lot of those Republican
senators and the
Trump administration.
And they are not going
to be getting any closer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: Just,
Judy, one point David
made about the interest.
The Nielsen ratings
just came out.
There were 19.5 million people
who watched that daytime.
It began 7:00 on the West Coast.
All right?
That's a big audience, Judy.
Compare it, there were
20 million who watched
Sunday night's NBA final
between the Cleveland
Cavaliers and the
Golden State Warriors.
That's a turnout.
And a lot more people obviously
saw the news and the clips
and the reports and this show.
And so I think, you know, it's
not the same thing as, you
know, war coverage or whatever,
but there is real
interest in this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, David, I
hear -- just quickly, I hear
both of you saying it's right
now mainly in Washington, but
that's going to filter down,
that's going to have an eventual
effect on how people view this.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
We could have had a day where
the Trump administration
really was in like
Titanic-like peril, if
there had been some
testimony about collusion,
if there had been some
really strong, repeated
push for him to
obstruct justice.
But we didn't have that.
And so we're looking
more long-term now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David
Brooks, Mark Shields,
see you next Friday.
Have a great weekend.